# 1. Introduction

Economics is the social science that studies choices that individuals, businesses, government, and entire societies make as they cope with scarcity and incentives that influence and reconcile those choices 

Scarcity - our inability to satisfy our needs. all economic questions arise because we want more than we can get

Choice - because we face scarcity, we make choices. The choices we make depends on the incentives we face

Incentive - a reward that encourages an action or a penalty that discourages an action

### Economies as a social science

Economists distinguish between two types of statement:
- Positive statements (“what is”) tested by checking it against facts
- Normative statements (“what ought to be”) expresses an opinion and cannot be tested

Economic model - a description of some aspect of the economic world that includes only those features that are needed for the purpose at hand.

But testing an economic model is difficult, so economists also use
- Natural experiments
- Statistical investigations
- Economic experiments

**Microeconomics -** the study of choices that individuals and businesses make, the way those choices interact in markets, and the influence of governments.

**Macroeconomics -** the study of the performance of the national and global economies.

Two Big Economic Questions

- How do choices end up determining what, how, and for whom goods and services get produced?
What  - goods and services are the objects that people value and produce to satisfy human wants
How - goods and services are produced by using productive resources that economists call factors of production. Factors of production are grouped into four categories: land, labour, capital, entrepreneurship
Whom - Who gets the goods and services depends on the incomes that people earn. Land earns rent. Labor earns wages. Capital earns interest. Entrepreneurship earns profit.
- When do choices made in the pursuit of self-interest also promote the social interest?
Every day, about 35 million Canadians and 6.9 billion people in other countries make economic choices that result in What, How, and For Whom goods and services are produced.
These choices are made by people who are pursuing their self-interest.
Are they promoting the social interest?
Self-Interest - You make choices that are in your self-interest—choices that you think are best for you.
Social Interest - Choices that are best for society as a whole are said to be in the social interest.

**The Economic Way of Thinking**

Six key ideas define the economic way of thinking:

- A choice is a tradeoff.
- People make rational choices by comparing benefits and costs.
- Benefit is what you gain from something.
- Cost is what you must give up to get something.
- Most choices are “how-much” choices made at the margin.
- Choices respond to incentives.